>> New research suggests that
times of global unrest present
a unique opportunity
for neurological growth
and profound behavior change,
but only when leveraged
correctly.
>> It's really important
for us to become aware
of our psychologically and
neurologically vulnerable state
that we're in right now.
>> This is Gaia News.
Kayla Osterhoff is a
neuropsychophysiologist
who studies the interaction
of the mind and brain, which
she calls the human
operating system.
>> One of the greatest mysteries
in modern neuroscience is
actually how the brain
produces the mind.
And the reason why
we have not been
able to come up with
the answer for this
is because that's
not how it works.
These two are actually separate
systems that interact together
to produce what I call
the human operating
system, which is responsible
for our version of reality
as human.
>> Osterhoff has recently been
researching the hypothesis that
times of social unrest
provide a valuable opportunity
to neurologically upgrade
this human operating system.
>> Right now we have this very
unique opportunity to upgrade
our human operating
system globally,
and that is because as a society
around the entire world we are
experiencing this social unrest.
And this has caused a couple
of significant cognitive
and neurological
shifts that have
provided an opportunity
for us to grow and evolve
as a society.
>> Osterhoff points to several
fascinating factors that
contribute to this phenomenon.
>> So studies are showing that
acute states of stress like
shock or trauma or something
surprising like what
we're currently experiencing in
our world cause this cognitive
psychological shift that
actually makes our subconscious
mind more suggestible meaning
that our subconscious mind is
brought forward, so to speak,
and it's more malleable.
It's more programmable.
If you look back at
clinical hypnosis research
and Eriksonian
research-- he was kind
of the father of
clinical hypnosis--
he found in his research that
shock and surprise are actually
a form of hypnotic
induction that
can be utilized to reprogram the
subconscious mind or increase
subconscious suggestibility.
>> Another contributing factor
Osterhoff has uncovered has
to do with the phenomenon
of neuroplasticity.
>> So neuroplasticity refers
to the way that our neurons,
our brain cells fire
and wire together.
And neuroplasticity
increases our ability
to change and reshape
these neural pathways.
The second opportunity
that we have right
now is a global increase
in neuroplasticity.
Now in these times of unrest,
our lives have been upended
and our patterns have shifted,
and we're experiencing
things for the first time.
So because of this our
globe is experiencing
heightened neural plasticity
and heightened subconscious
suggestibility.
>> What are the implications
of these findings?
>> Now the opportunity here is
that we can leverage these two
abilities to change and grow
and evolve and shift and learn
to our benefit, or if we
remain unaware of this,
we can be shifted in a way that
is detrimental to us as well.
For instance, if you
want to quit smoking
or you want to change
some kind of behavior,
you have a greater
ability to do that
right now than ever before.
And on the opposite
side of things,
if you're spending this
time in fear or in worry,
you risk hard-wiring in those
behaviors into your physiology.
Because this is happening
on a mass scale,
our world has a greater capacity
to evolve and shift and grow
than it ever has before.
So we need to leverage this.
We need to take
advantage so that we
can make the positive
changes that we want
to see in the world happen.
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.